# Structural constraints of boolean Gene Regulatory Networks define the directionality of cell development.

  The evolution of multicellular organisms was accredited since the 1960s to the meticulously well-established synthetic neo-Darwinian theory of molecular biology that described evolution as the accumulation over time and inheritance of random variants of discrete Mendelian-defined genes due to natural selection. This flow of information or “cell state transition” over time, instructs and permits the development of countless of phenotypes and is majorly consisted of cell differentiation and spatiotemporal patterning. Due to advance technology and persistent research it has been revealed that inheritance and evolution is implemented via the complex interactions among genetic and external stimuli in contrast of the earlier “genetic deterministic” views. These interactions institute some quantitative restrictions that are the core of the strict organization that can be observed in biological life. This insight was primary discussed on the 1940s by Conrad Hal Waddington who captures the idea of constrains due to the organism’s design in his famous metaphor of the epigenetic landscape.  This topic has been gaining exponential interest in the scientific community and numerous investigation have been carried, aiming to relating transcription factors, gene to gene interactions and extrinsic stimuli to form regulatory networks that are then inputted to computer models and simulations to represent the genotypic-phenotypic pair. However, the pair’s alteration of overtime and their ability to evolve and adapt due to the dynamics of the network and natural selection is rarely the subject of examination. In this current work, we have developed an efficient algorithm that demonstrate a quantitative method of using the structural constrains to predict the direction of development in biological pathways in human and thus attribute the property of adaptability to certain “capable” cell states that respond better and pass on that ability to do so to their successors.
	
  The GRNs are usually thought as critical systems because they are finite in size, containing a fixed number of components and Fi() functions, and because if you start from any combination of component states (on/off) then using the functions Fi() you can predict all states and all next states of the network which will be described as the outcomes of functions Fi(). This recursive methodology of describing the current states of all components of the network due to its immediate precursor state is governed by the equation :
Xt+1 = F (Xt)
where Xt is a n-dimensional vector of on/off values for all n components, t is arbitrary time progressing by 1 unit and F is the transition of Xt to Xt+1 due all Fi() function operating synchronously. 
  This architecture concludes in connecting few states of combinations of on/off for all components to few other states of identical or different combinations of on/off for all components. This network is not fully connected since such a property would classify it as a chaotic systems and limited assumptions could be made about the biological contribution of its component to the specific regulatory pathway. It is the case that the resulting system contains either transient states, states that are intermediate states going from an initial to a succeeding state as t increases or final states, states that once reached independent of t will circulate in themselves or in a few others cycling back to themselves for all the remaining time. The set of transient states that result to the cycling final set of states is called the basin and the final set of states is called an attractor because it “attracts” all other states of its basin to itself. The attractor states have been interpreted as the cell types observed in experiments using the specific components of the GRN under investigation because of their persistence and resistance to small change introduced to the system as random flip of a component to on from off or the other way around5. Further, the attractors, as the cell types, are discrete structures, differentiable from each other and yet produced by a continuum of combinations of the same components.

